[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe,
>> [music]
>> I have a prop for today.
>> I
prop episode.
>> A visual learning aid for a podcast. I'm
going to hold this up.
>> Yeah.
>> What is this?
>> Uh it looks like a magenta marker.
>> Magenta?
>> Yeah.
>> It's pink. It's hot pink.
>> What's magenta?
>> It's like purplish pink.
>> Really?
>> Okay. Color is beside the point. It is
indeed a highlighter, but more
importantly, it is a result of a complex
petrochemicals supply chain.
>> You're right. It is magenta is more
purplish. I don't know why I always
thought it was a little bit more
pinkish, but yes, you're correct. You're
right. You're correct. You're totally
correct.
>> I didn't intend your major takeaway from
this conversation to be the difference
between pink and magenta. Okay.
>> But yes, you're right. And without
advanced chemicals of all sorts and oil
and all that, you would never have the
plastic shell of the marker and maybe
even some aspects of what gives it color
when you draw something.
>> All right. So, what is this plastic
casing actually made of? This is a pop
quiz.
>> That I definitely have no idea.
>> Okay. It starts from
>> Yeah.
>> crude oil.
>> Yeah, that I Okay. Yeah, that.
>> So, crude oil distilled into
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> Keep going.
>> naphtha.
>> Naphtha, right. Naphtha.
>> And then naphtha is This is a hint.
Cracked into
ethylene or propylene.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> done a podcast episode before.
>> I know. Yeah.
>> Okay. And then it gets polymerized
>> Po- Yeah, of course.
>> into polyethylene.
>> Right.
>> And polypropylene.
>> And then it gets chopped up into tiny
little plastic pellets, which are I know
you know this one.
What are they called? The little plastic
pellets. One of my favorite words.
>> Go on.
>> Nurdles.
>> Nurdles. I remember all of this from
that episode that we did. Nurdle.
>> The building blocks of highlighters and
lots of other plastic products would be
nurdles. Okay, so the reason we bring
this up is obviously there's a situation
in Iran. The Strait of Hormuz is still
closed. We're recording this on March
24th and we're starting to see a lot of
the disruptions in the oil market start
to I guess ripple out into other
petrochemicals.
>> Right. And someone asked this on Twitter
the other day and they were like, "Joe,
is the higher price of oil going to
impact the price of plastics?" And I was
like, "I would be very surprised if it
didn't." I mean, I don't really know for
sure, but it would be very weird. Like,
it would be hard for me to imagine a
scenario in which the key input doesn't.
The thing that I am very curious about
and you described a sort of a sequential
chain of industrial processes from the
oil to the nurdles. And of course, when
we did the episode, one of the things
that we've talked about is that there is
a gap between the price of some of these
end products and the implied price of
crude oil. So, crude oil, I don't know
exactly where it is right now at this
moment that we're recording it, but it
shot up. But these end products have
shot up even more and our guest, Rory
Johnston, had a really good explanation,
which is that the refineries do not want
to shut down. And so, they're rationing,
they're slowing their input their input
because it is very costly to shut down
and ever restart should they ever run
out, which is a prospect given that
we're seeing a volumetric decline in the
amount of oil available in the world.
What I'm curious about, which I don't
know the answer, is whether this applies
to all of the different processing steps
along the way, which is is there this
sort of even greater price impact
because the entities that do all these
sequential industrial processes are
slowing down because the shutdown and
restart process is costly for them as
well.
>> Well, I would say the added complication
with a lot of petrochemicals is we are
in fact seeing some closures already.
So, in Asia we've had a few crackers, as
they're called, Asian crackers, start to
shut down their production and basically
declare force majeure. And so, we are
seeing fewer petrochemicals get made in
places like Japan and South Korea. I
think the question we're kind of inching
towards is whether or not this is just
going to be a question of price. You
know, prices for plastics go up or an
actual supply shortage in the sense that
maybe you just can't get certain types
of plastics or packaging. And one other
thing I would just add, I think in the
post-COVID environment, an
underappreciated driver of inflation at
that time was the cost of packaging.
>> That's right.
>> Cuz we did see the cost of plastics go
up. And if you think about what you're
buying at a grocery store, like, okay,
it's a bunch of carrots, but it's also a
bunch of carrots in a plastic bag.
>> plastic bag. Completely or jar or
whatever. And I would say in a lot of
the cases of food stuffs in particular,
you're mostly paying for the entire
supply chain and the packaging of it.
The actual food value is almost dirt
cheap if nothing. And so, yeah, and are
we just going to get outright shortages?
What are the ripple effects? I don't
think we have any idea. Probably one of
these things that compounds the longer
this war and closure goes on. Many
questions that we have.
>> All right. Well, I am happy to say we do
in fact have the perfect guest to talk
all things petrochemicals. We're going
to be speaking with Philip Gerts. He is
the chemicals and oil analyst over at
BNEF and a guy who lives and breathes
polymers. Hopefully not literally.
>> Not breathes. Hopefully not [laughter]
breathes polymers.
>> All right, Philip. Thank you so much for
coming on Odd Lots.
>> Thank you very much, Tracy and Joe. And
sounds very sad to introduce me with
living and breathing polymers, but I'll
take it. I'll I'll [laughter] take it
for sure.
>> Well, we're all filled with
microplastics now, right? So, you're not
the only one.
>> Exactly right.
>> So, I'm tempted to begin just by asking
you to kind of list all the
petrochemicals affected by the Strait of
Hormuz, sort of like Forest Gump style.
Ethylene, propylene, polyethylene, you
can go on and on and on. But just
broadly, why don't you tell us about the
Gulf region and its role in the
petrochemicals supply chain?
>> Whew, right. Yeah, lots to unpack here.
So, when it comes to chemicals at large,
let's maybe establish three different
categories. We have the feedstock, like
you already pointed out Tracy, basically
you almost don't need me here. But you
have the crude oil that's turned into
naphtha and liquefied petroleum gas,
which are butane and propane
principally, ethane. Those are all the
feedstocks that go into the so-called
crackers, and the crackers turn them in
what we call base chemicals. There are
technically six major base chemicals
that come out of this, but for the sake
of today's discussion the major focus
will probably be really around ethylene,
propylene. If you want to get really
fancy, we can talk about xylenes,
paraxylene
or butadiene, but a lot of the really
the majority of the bulk plastics that
we talk about really come from ethylene
and propylene and some from paraxylene
in terms of polyethylene terephthalate
or also more commonly known as
polyester. So, ethylene, propylene,
xylene are turned into polyethylene,
polypropylene and into polyethylene
terephthalate or polyester.
Now,
you have a wide range of really
different derivative chains. Even within
polyethylene, you have a lot of
subcategories and within those
subcategories, you have other
subcategories. Very simple terms, you
have a three-way division into
high-density polyethylene, low-density
polyethylene and linear low-density
polyethylene.
Doesn't matter too much, but it's good
to be aware of that when we talk about
well in analyst terms about where the
market is moving, we typically look at
high-density polyethylene. What's the
supply demand there? Same goes for
low-density. Obviously, they have
different applications and also within
those larger buckets, there a lot of
subcategories.
Now, to circle back to the major theme
here of what's the position of the
Middle East Gulf?
So, within those three categories,
firstly, the Middle East itself is a
major exporter of polyethylene,
polypropylene, etc., etc., especially of
polyethylene. And when I say major,
let's be specific indeed. Polyethylene,
polyethylene varieties, that's about 12%
of global capacity. Production will be
slightly higher, 13-14%.
Quite a significant chunk. To make that
even more explicit, if you take those
volumes, we're talking about 18 million
tons, 18, of production capacity. And
Middle Eastern crack or Middle Eastern
facilities typically run at very high
rates, 90 to 100%. So, roughly an
equivalent amount of production. If you
take all of that, that's basically as
much as Europe  slightly more
consumes. So, it's a lot, right? You
have those volumes firstly being taken
off the market directly. Although,
couple of asterisks here because
technically, polymers are exported
differently than fuel. They're exported
in a solid state, which means
theoretically, there should be the
possibility of diversion that's slightly
easier than for oil, naphtha, or oil
products in general.
Big asterisk there. But if you take all
of that off the market, you basically
have the entirety of what Europe
consumes all of the sudden disappearing.
So, that's step number one.
Emphasis here on this goes especially
again for polyethylene varieties.
Polypropylene is slightly lower. We're
talking about seven-ish percent of
global production.
PVC, polyvinyl chloride, which is used
heavily in infrastructure, even lower at
3 to 4%. Styrene, which is another major
value chain we're talking about, again 6
to 7%. So, the Middle East in terms of
polymers, that's really, really a
polyethylene story, but not exclusively.
So, that's step number one, the direct
polymer export. Step number two is, and
that I would argue, is really where you
see the biggest impact, is on the
feedstock side. Again, this is something
you can subdivide into three categories.
[clears throat]
You have direct naphtha exports. You
have crude oil exports that are then
turned into naphtha amongst others, so
the refineries run on it. And obviously,
if you have to cut refinery rates,
you're also going to lose naphtha
output. And you have what's again called
LPG, liquefied petroleum gas, which I'll
just allude to, well, as LPG from now
on, but it means propane, butane.
So, you have those three. They almost
exclusively go to Asia. And when I say
Asia, we can go into the nitty-gritty
details of how dependent each individual
producer is exactly in those feedstock
streams, because there are quite huge
differences there.
But in very broad terms, polymer
exports, that's 12%. If we take the
naphtha ex- the naphtha exports and the
crude oil exports,
and we translate that into how much does
ethylene and consequently polyethylene
production would have to be cut in Asia,
that's probably around 15 to 17% of
global production. So, that's really
where the predominant hit comes from.
>> That was fantastic. First of all, quick
question, so on naphtha, is that
typically produced where the oil comes
from? How tight is that if it's derived
from crude oil? Is it typically right
there or are there parts of the value
chain where the oil gets shipped a long
way and then the naphtha is produced
somewhere else?
>> It's basically the latter, or rather, it
just depends, right?
>> Okay.
>> The same as as for refineries at large,
it just depends on where your refineries
are located. So, if you look at the
Middle East, for example, or let's take
Saudi,
>> Okay.
>> Saudi produces around 10 to 11 million
barrels of crude oil per day, but if I'm
not mistaken, its refining capacity is
around anywhere between 3 and 4 million
barrels per day. So in that case, it
refines a relatively small amount of its
total production capacity.
>> So, to Joe's point, why do places like
Japan and South Korea, why do they have,
you know, crackers who are refining
naphtha into other polymers at all?
>> Ooh.
>> Why does that make sense for them? Or is
strategically important?
>> Well, history plays a huge role.
Japan, next to Europe and the US, was
really one of the frontrunners of the
petrochemical industry. And that's also
why, at the same time, even before all
of this happened, Japan was also on the
front line of losing its chemical
industry. That's another topic we can
get into later.
But basically, your question would also
be then, why aren't those products
exclusively produced in the Middle East
and then shipped to them?
>> Why not just import them? Why even
bother refining them domestically?
>> Well, I mean, it's not only a question
of naphtha per se, right? But Japan also
needs jet fuel, diesel, gasoline, etc.
So all of those come into one supply
chain.
And another asterisk here is the Middle
East
Again, the Middle East is also a major
producer of chemicals. If you look at
ethylene, for example, the largest by
far, surprisingly, I don't need to turn
this into a pop quiz, that's China.
That's 61 million tons of ethylene, 25%
of global capacity. Then comes the US,
44 million tons. A data, by the way, as
of January 2026, provisionally.
Then you have Saudi Arabia, 17 million
tons, right? So you already have a huge
step down here. But Saudi Arabia is the
third largest producer or in terms of
chemical ethylene capacity, at least.
Then you have South Korea of 13 million
tons. So what I'm getting at here is the
Middle East already, Saudi as an
example, produces a lot, has a lot of
capacity. But because they're such
extraordinary oil producers next to
chemical producers, and the chemicals
they produce locally, by the way, are
largely gas derived. We can get also get
into that later. But they do both,
right? They export a lot of polymers, a
lot of chemicals, but they also export a
lot of products. It's
probably a bigger question in terms of
the overall oil supply chain why
companies have chosen to also build out
the refineries in Japan, South Korea, or
added an all in the Middle East itself.
>> [music]
[music]
>> So, Tracy obviously started the
conversation showing her hot pink
>> [laughter]
>> highlighter.
>> That's right. You learned
[clears throat] something.
>> you know, if we have to go for a while
without making highlighters, or maybe we
reduce the colors of the highlighters,
it's not the end of the world. The world
isn't going to come to a screeching end,
etc. But, I imagine some things are a
little bit higher on the value chain.
And so, when we talk about naphtha, we
talk about some of these other things,
what end uses would you be most worried
about now? Because the volume or the
capacity numbers that you mentioned are
pretty substantial. So, again, I'm not
too worried if we go for a little few
months without making highlighters. What
are the end use cases that you're
watching right now that like, "Oh, this
could be a real problem."
>> Oh, you guys had podcasts on
fertilizers, I understand.
>> Yeah, that's right. Yeah.
>> It's a very similar story. My main
concern without it out would be food
packaging.
>> Okay.
>> I am not aware of any fungible products
for polyethylene to be used at the same
scale for food packaging as well
polyethylene. So, I do not know whether
it is a viable alternative. Maybe there
is and I'm just ignorant about it. But,
to me, without a doubt, food packaging
and packaging at large, it's very cliché
to take your own topic and talk about
how incredibly important it is to
modern-day [laughter] society. But, I
mean,
>> But, this is the complexity of
modern-day society. And this is actually
a very important point, which is that
you
joke and it's like everyone jokes is
like, "Oh, what I do is the
is the key thing holding modern-day
society together."
>> Podcasts are wrong.
>> But, they're not Okay, podcasting maybe
not, but like they're not wrong. Like
any one of these things go and the whole
thing goes. That was the lesson from
COVID. So you're not
So take the take the credit. You're at
the center of the world right now. So
yeah, all right, talk about food
packaging and what you're worried about.
>> Yeah, food packaging, packaging at
large. I'm less worried about let's say
infrastructure projects, right? Because
if you take, let's say high density
polyethylene and polyvinyl chloride, a
lot of them go into infrastructure
projects. Hence why you could see in
India for example since 2018 2019 huge
surge in those chemicals demand,
especially high density polyethylene,
because there were incredibly large
infrastructure projects, especially on
water pipelines if I'm not mistaken. So
a lot goes into that. Still incredibly
important, but if we talk about meeting
really the urgent tasks of the day,
which is making sure that everybody has
access to their basic needs,
I find it very hard to see how value
chains can be constructed or how a
shortage of polyethylene or other
plastics can be circumvented. Especially
polyethylene here I'm concerned about
because of the disproportionate impact.
And
we briefly touched upon, hey, if 12% of
polymers are cut off, uh polymer exports
from the Middle East and the feed stocks
are cut off,
but that's only a part of the story.
There are many angles here to take.
Overall impact obviously without a doubt
will be sizable. How sizable time will
tell.
But
I cannot think of alternatives to the
problem we would be facing, which is
packaging, getting stuff from A to B,
making sure that stuff is conserved. So
if anybody knows in the audience, please
let us know in the comments or
we're open to learn.
>> So, okay,
on that note, what are we seeing now in
terms of polyethylene availability? So I
mentioned that we have seen some
crackers in Asia who have had to reduce
their refining output. Are we seeing
prices start to rise? Are we seeing
outright shortages? What are you
observing in the market so far?
>> So I would kick this off by saying that
everything happens with a significant
delay.
And especially now, voyages from the
Middle East Gulf to South Korea, Japan
take about 18 to 25 days. And our kind
of now entering that period. So, if you
look at crude oil imports that went to
South Korea, for example, you could see
them still spiking in the second week of
March just because a lot of ships
departed in late February. Whether or
not in anticipation of this happening,
but there is a spike in the second week
of March.
So, on the physical side,
to me it seems we have seen
comparatively little impact yet. I think
most of this will really materialize
around early April. And from there on it
gets worse pretty quickly.
Also, one important side note here, and
people can again pitch in in the
comments, but polyethylene markets are
relatively opaque when it comes to the
exact availability. So, we talk a lot
about run rates, even demand, right? One
very cliché topic that's regurgitated a
lot is demand in Europe is lukewarm. But
if you look at apparent demand, which is
trade plus some
production run rate assumptions that are
reasonable and based on company
statements, you see that demand is
pretty stable. So, my point here is that
demand, how much is consumed in the
first place, is a relatively obscure
topic in the world of polyethylene and
plastics. Because if you look at what
polyethylene consumption means, you have
a lot, hundreds, thousands per market,
of small plastic converters. They take
those pellets, and they turn them into
usable plastics.
And to me it seems data collection there
may not be as
well developed as for, let's say, oil
refineries. Or maybe I'm just ignorant
about it, but that's been my observation
so far in the industry that demand
numbers are hard to get by. So, circling
this back to where we're at right now,
three, four weeks into this scenario,
I'd be careful with any concrete data
points you're seeing or any general
statements about demand being down,
about supply being cut. Force majeures,
for sure, we've seen an incredible high
amount of statements
of production being cut. We can also get
into the details of which markets, how
much.
But if you look at across Asia, you've
had about
30 to 40 crackers probably that have
made statements in one way, shape, or
form. Quite often though, that just
pertains to production curtailments, not
per se a full shutdown.
Or force measures, meaning that
they cannot guarantee that they can
supply their contractors with whatever
the contract stipulates.
Very long story, slightly less long. So
far, my take is the impact has been
relatively limited on the material
front. We have seen price increases by
the way, especially on the naphtha front
in Asia.
But
I would be very surprised if this does
not deteriorate very significantly over
the next 2 to 3 weeks.
>> By the way, I wasn't sure I genuinely
wasn't sure about this. There is
polyethylene futures that trade on the
Dalian commodity exchange. We have
quotes on this. You can see they're
traded in lots of five metric tons. So,
in USD, at the beginning of the year, it
looks like they were trading at around
$925
for five metric tons of polyethylene.
Now, around $1,300. So, the price has
already surged massively.
I'm curious though, like when we think
about the market for some of these
chemicals that you track, how much is it
sort of um
open liquid markets versus long-term
contracts, etc. that you know, sort of
dark prices that the public would never
see because it's an arrangement between
the producer and a specific buyer, etc.
versus more clearing how is model? Like,
talk to us about pricing transparency
that we have in this market.
>> Ooh. Yeah, love it. Just quick
disclaimer here, there's subtopics that
I know more of and there's subtopics
that I know less about. This falls into
the category of the latter, but to my
understanding when it comes to prices
and contracts in the polymer markets,
the vast majority is stipulated via
contracts, although they're typically
relatively short-lived on a monthly
quarterly basis. That's my observation.
I may be wrong.
And in terms of the spot market, they're
relatively small, but the spot market is
usually
>> That's what I figured.
>> But the spot market is usually where you
see those price distortions firstly
showing up, right? And when it comes to
the first three to four weeks,
especially this week has been relatively
This This week actually had quite a
phenomenon because I just checked the
prices
an hour ago, and I was surprised by
polyethylene in East Asia apparently
stagnating over the past week, which to
me
either something is wrong with the
prices that I was looking at [laughter]
or some of my theoretical underpinnings
are slightly off. So, I'm I'm curious
about that for the next couple of days /
weeks.
>> Didn't that happen during COVID as well?
Wasn't there a big arbitrage between
like polyethylene prices in Europe and
the US versus Asia? There seemed to be
these regional
>> Yeah, for sure.
>> differences.
>> 100%. It depends on which part of the
value chain you look at and whether
you're looking at margins, which is what
most companies are really curious about,
right? How much profit can I actually
make out of this versus prices? So, if
you talk about polyethylene prices, for
example, they're comparatively low in
Asia compared to Europe. The US is also
low, but the US also only pays a
fraction of the production cost because
US is ethane or gas-based. Asia and
Europe are largely naphtha-based. And
the reason, by the way, this is
important aspect Almost going into a
side tangent here. But it's very common
within our industry to talk about how
ethane gas-based production is more
competitive, is cheaper. But one of the
principal reasons why this is the case
is because you only need 1.2 tons of
ethane to produce 1 ton of ethylene,
whereas if you produce ethylene via
naphtha, you need about 3.2 tons of
naphtha. So, you just need a lot more
feedstock, and obviously you get a lot
of byproducts. But then for naphtha
cracking in Europe and Asia, their
competitiveness also hinges a lot on
what the price movements are of those
byproducts, just as a side note.
>> Hm. By the way, I'm looking at the
European naphtha swap, and this trades
in uh the NYMEX. That is at $842
per metric ton right now, but that was
around 496 at the beginning of the year.
So, all of these different chemicals and
polymers they're talking about massive
spikes, obviously, and the big spike,
obviously, since the start of the war.
What does it mean when force majeure is
declared? What does that actually
entail?
>> Uh you tell me. No, uh it's [laughter]
it's it it depends a lot. Usually,
again, we like to
talk a lot in certain terms. I think a
force majeure colloquially is implied to
mean, "Oh, production is fully cut." It
kind of depends. So, to give you one
concrete example, Wanwha Chemicals in
China has, amongst others, two very
large crackers, 2.2 million tons in
total in Yantai, Shandong region.
Hopefully, not butchering the
pronunciation too much.
They declared force majeure for their
supplies to the Middle East. So, I
looked at this, and I was like, "Well,
what does this mean?" So, you dig
further, try to find something specific.
The only thing I could find publicly
announced is they're declaring force
majeure on their supplies to the Middle
East, which to me was very interesting
because in the first place, very few
Chinese producers are suppliers to the
Middle East of certain chemicals in the
first place. So, the bottom line here
being that when you read force majeure,
at least that's what I'm doing,
if I don't find anything specific,
it's a big question mark, and I usually
assume it means reduced run rates.
Question is then also by how much. Kind
of a floor for a lot of crackers is 50
to 60% of their total capacity. Below
that, it quite often is said it gets
uneconomical, but it is a big question
mark to me, at least.
>> So, this came up in the context of jet
fuel, but the sort of the implied barrel
price of jet fuel is higher than what a
barrel of oil is trading for right now
because of this dynamic where the
refiners are running slow because it's
costly to actually have to straight up
shut down. Can you talk about that in
the context of some of these chemicals?
Does the same phenomenon apply that it
is a very costly business choice to
actually shut down the refinery and do
we see a widening spread between where
the price of oil is right now and the
implied price of oil by the end product
price?
>> Yeah, that's a great question. If I'm
not mistaken, the spread has increased a
lot over the past 3 weeks.
>> Okay.
>> Both in Europe and in Asia.
But especially in after price in Asia
have surged.
So, here the following hypothesis.
To me it seems based on what we've
talked about earlier how chemicals are
used with a lot of it going into
packaging and let's define actually how
much. So, polyethylene consumes about 60
to 70% of ethylene, which again is the
main product that we're getting from
naphtha cracking.
So, let's just say close to more than
half of naphtha in one way, shape, or
form is used for polyethylene and those
type of chemicals that are used for
packaging.
So, half of it is pretty much dictated
ish by the packaging sector. Now, in
reality it's more complicated and maybe
we can cut it to 1/3 or so. It's a huge
chunk either way. And to me again, that
sector seems pretty non-fungible. It's
very hard to really destroy a lot of
demand within an industry. If we talk
about jet fuel, diesel, and gasoline on
the other hand, we can introduce carless
Sundays. We can introduce or people will
at the end of the day if flight tickets
just become too expensive to start to
not fly on Sundays.
>> just period. That Yeah, yeah.
>> So, so to me it seems that diesel,
gasoline, and jet fuel have more wiggle
room for demand destruction than
naphtha. That's my current hypothesis.
And again, maybe I've been I may be
proven wrong
on that because it's also the first time
for me being in such a scenario. I mean,
for all of us in a way. Yeah. But so,
when it comes to the spread between
crude oil and naphtha for both Asia and
Europe, my expectation is that well, the
argument seems to be very strong that
that will increase over next weeks,
potentially months.
For naphtha, a big question here also
that I'm just throwing into the room is
how viable is it for refineries to
actually shift more toward naphtha
production both from an economical and
just engineering perspective, right?
Because within the industry we often
talk about those things as a given.
Naphtha production is kind of fixed,
which to an extent is true, but also not
true.
At a certain point, and maybe there are
some chemical engineers here that know
this better than I do, but at a certain
point it may even become feasible to
switch some road fuel production toward
naphtha production if indeed demand
destruction on gasoline becomes stronger
than naphtha.
>> Hm. I want to go back to you mentioned
China for a second, and I remember
seeing headlines about China's
petrochemical boom and worries about a
glut in the market, and I think some of
those headlines were like 2 months ago.
>> Yeah.
>> Can China pick up some of this
production? I assume it's getting some
naphtha from I I would guess Russia or
Iran at this point. Like what's going on
there?
>> Yeah, big question. Short-term, no.
Short-term, minus if you have would have
a lot of production within refinery
shifting away from gasoline to naphtha.
Minus that scenario, and again, I don't
know how technically feasible that is or
economically for a lot of refineries,
but other than that, I don't see any
possible way where you could compensate
for that, right? Because let's be
specific. So, we're talking about
again, assuming a full disruption here,
we talk about roughly 17 18 million tons
disappearing from the Middle East.
We talk about
South Korea, Japan, so major Asian
players here to be specific. We have
South Korea first, Japan, Taiwan,
Singapore,
India, Thailand, and Malaysia, and
Indonesia. Those I think should be
eight.
Now, if you take them together, they
probably have an ethylene production
capacity of around 45 million tons-ish.
So, China and them together is about 100
million tons, China 60 million, those
others about 40 million together. Out of
those 40 million, depending on again
what happens, but probably around 30
million you could potentially discard.
Is it's It don't quote me on that exact
number, but just to give a ballpark,
right?
>> [gasps]
>> I don't see any possible way how you
could compensate for that. You have some
wiggle room because some cracking were
operating at lower rates. You can
compensate there in the US especially.
But if you assume for example that US
was running at about 85% before and they
would go all the way up to 95-100% now,
so 10 to 15% difference, that's about 4
to 6 million tons added. So, that's
basically 1/10 of what more 1/8 of what
would be lost in a in the most extreme
scenario. Then when it comes to China,
thing is that those crackers are large
projects. They take time. And the world
at large had an incredible incredibly
large pipeline for 2026, which is
ironic, and which is why I emphasize
polyethylene so much because the amount
of projects, like world-scale projects,
that are very well covered and no
uncertainty about whether they would
come online or not until now.
They were set to come and now they seem
largely either off the table or a big
question mark. So, I I don't see any way
in the short term to compensate for such
an extreme shortfall if that were really
to manifest
>> Mhm.
>> to the utmost extent.
>> That's a really good example of how
these short-term disruptions can linger
for years and years and years. Okay, one
other question on trying to fill the gap
in supply. What about recycling existing
plastics? I mean, we've been told for
years and years and years the world is
awash in plastics. Like, okay, let's do
something with that.
>> Yeah, that's an excellent question. I
don't see why recycling should not get a
major boost from this if this persists.
To me that seems like a very reasonable
solution. There are obviously a lot of
aspects where recycling
has its own fair share of complications
in terms of having to firstly distill
the different types of streams. You also
need production facilities for for this,
which also again needs time to be built.
I'm utterly unaware of the existing
utilization rate or of the utilization
rates of existing recycling facilities,
but which probably tells you something
about the importance of recycling in
>> [laughter]
>> petrochemical chemical analyst career,
but yeah.
Exactly, right. It's very much under
fringes. I'm very very very peripherally
aware of it. But when I think about
recycling facilities that I read on more
anecdotally, they're usually in the
range of a couple of tens of thousands
to maybe a hundred thousand
tons per year of production capacity,
which compares to a world scale cracker
that it's usually one to two
[clears throat] million tons, right? So,
that's an order of magnitude lower. That
said, if you look at the total share of
global polymers that are in circulation
that come from recycling,
I find it hard to give an exact number,
but maybe 1/10 or so cuz it depends on
the sub stream and again, it's not my
forte per se.
It's a reasonable amount and I could
definitely see especially
within the time frame of a couple of
months that this would gather a lot of
speed or it would become priority to
fill some gaps somewhere. But again, it
probably falls short very significantly
from really [music] fixing the problem.
>> [music]
[music]
>> When we did a recent episode about
natural gas, one of the winners at least
in the short term was coal and that
countries that that can't get natural
gas, they're going to turn to coal for
energy and you see coal prices creeping
up. What about coal liquefaction? Isn't
it in the short or medium term? I mean,
you could turn coal into oil. The
Germans did that during World War II and
that's still a thing. Can that in the
medium term be
just derive our plastics from coal?
>> Medium term, sure, but I don't think
medium term is the problem here.
>> Yeah. If we define medium term as we say
Yeah, that's right. Right. That's not
going to help us.
>> Right. Right.
>> But like you know if we see like you
know this is going to reshape like you
know like the longer that this goes on
and we don't know how long that this is
going to go on.
>> Yeah.
>> Could coal at some point in the short to
medium term be part of the solution for
the origin of our plastic?
>> Beautiful question. I think the bigger
question here is
well, twofold. Firstly, if this
continues, will it reshape how the
global chemical industry works?
>> Yeah.
>> And the second part is maybe have we
already reached that point because I
think even if things were to quote
unquote normalize, whatever that may
mean right now, I think one major
problem that we face is that the
perceived risk of passing through the
Strait of Hormuz has changed.
>> Yeah.
>> And a lot of Asian producers were
already on the cusp of closing their
business. And by a lot I mean South
Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Singapore
especially. If you take them together,
you talk about South Korea's 13 million
tons, Japan 6 million tons, Singapore
and Taiwan both 3 to 4 million tons. So
collectively close to 30 million tons.
It's a lot. Not all of it was set to be
closed, but to me if I looked at the
fundamentals, it seemed reasonable to
assume that by 2030 about 30 to 50% of
this could disappear.
>> Wait. Wait. Sorry. What?
>> Very long story short because the
overcapacity that was in the pipeline
especially for polyethylene was so
severe that
the case was very hard to make for some
units to stay in business, right? And my
hypothesis here is that what's happening
currently
the increased
perception of risk through the Strait of
Hormuz for an industry in a market that
was already perceived to be well, really
going downhill.
Pretty much
could really lead a lot of facilities to
just close down over next couple of
months. I would be very surprised if
that does not happen. Then the question
becomes what Well, two questions here.
Firstly, what happens afterward if
things indeed normalize?
And then secondly, for the entire
pipeline that exists for next 4 to 5
years, a lot of it was also in Asia or
the Middle East and hinged on
feedstocks coming from the Middle East.
What happens to that?
And to go full circle here and to your
coal question, that's something I looked
into and did I wondered. So, to put it
into perspective, China right now has 60
million tons of ethylene capacity.
Roughly 50 million tons of this is oil
or gas based. So, it comes from
cracking. 10 million tons comes from
coal
>> Okay.
>> /methanol.
Side note here also that because how it
works is that coal is converted to
methanol, which is then converted to
ethylene or propylene. Methanol is also
imported from the Middle East. So, that
could also cut into that production
there.
But when it comes to coal, it would need
a really huge push. So, now we have 10
million tons of ethylene. We have
another roughly 3 to 4 million tons in
the pipeline because China has been
revitalizing that already before the
war.
But the push again would be extremely
significant. You would be talking about
basically three to fourfold quadrupling
the sector over next couple of years,
right? Which in theory could happen,
especially for a country such as China,
which has proven in the past time and
time again that it's very much capable
of completely revamping industries.
But it would be a big push. I I think
what's more likely to happen is three
things.
So, firstly, renewed Again, also depends
obviously on how long the supply
disruption is, but I think we're well on
our way. I think one, renewed interest
in the Western Hemisphere. Using Western
Hemisphere here more broadly because I
would say for the US, there are also a
couple of asterisks in terms of the
political environment.
>> Sure.
>> Whether that is not considered to be too
volatile.
Debt out of the way though, if you talk
about chemicals and the potential there,
there was a significant slowdown because
of this overcapacity, but US producers
right now are having a heyday. And even
if this does not continue for a long
time, I think again that this heightened
risk or this heightened perception of
risk at Hormuz really shifts a lot of
production potentially to the US. So,
I'd be surprised if you would not see a
lot of renewed interest in US ethane and
US chemicals.
>> Yeah, this was going to be my next
question actually. So, I'm looking at a
chart, right? This is going back to the
beginning of our conversation. So, this
is a chart of sensitivity of different
oil or fuel products to demand
destruction.
>> I'm cheating like on an exam. [laughter]
I'm like you can't see it. I'm in the
studio. I'm leaning over and looking at
Tracy's laptop. I'm like, I need to get
a look at
>> So, it actually it has
>> J.P. Morgan chart.
>> J.P. Morgan, yeah. So, it has, you know,
jet fuel is pretty sensitive because, as
we were talking about earlier, if the
price of jet fuel goes up, flights tend
to get curtailed. It also says that
naphtha is pretty sensitive. And one of
the reasons naphtha apparently is
sensitive is because if prices for
naphtha go up, then petrochemical plants
can substitute ethane.
Which it seems we're starting to see.
I'm also reading a Bloomberg's I'm doing
my research for this episode while we're
in the middle of the episode, but
regardless of that, there's a Bloomberg
story that's saying that US producers of
polyethylene are buying more ethylene to
make plastics.
What's the substitutability of ethane
versus naphtha?
Cuz you touched on this earlier, but I
really want to drill down on this point.
>> Not very high.
>> Okay.
>> So, two things here.
I realize I like making a lot of lists
without completing them, but maybe we
can get full circle on the other topics
later. But on this, two things. So,
first is just technical substitution.
So, the furnaces that are used for
ethane and naphtha, they're pretty
different in a lot of ways that they're
configured. So, switching between those
two is pretty difficult. And very
specifically, one major problem is the
type of products that you get from both,
right? So, if you crack ethane, you
principally only get ethylene in notable
amounts. Whereas, if you crack naphtha,
you get ethylene, you get propylene, you
get butadiene, you get benzene, and all
that.
>> you mentioned earlier.
>> Exactly, right? And they need to be
separated, and there is a whole post
this cracking section for that that just
vastly differs for naphtha cracker
versus ethane.
Do I think one
common point of confusion is So, you
have three major oil or gas feedstock
streams. You have naphtha, you have LPG,
and ethane.
And I would group LPG and naphtha as
being more together than LPG and ethane,
despite the fact that LPG and ethane are
colloquially kind of referred to as
being gas-based. But, LPG also gives a
lot of byproducts. So, the substitution
possibility there is higher than for
ethane. And also, if you just look at
the practicality of it,
they're comparatively, outside of the US
and the Middle East, there are not that
many crackers that use ethane. And if
they use ethane, they typically fully
use ethane. Not exclusively, there are
some exceptions, such as I think the One
Hua Chemical Yantai cracker that I
mentioned earlier, one of those actually
runs partially on ethane, partially on
naphtha.
But, typically, if a cracker fully runs
on ethane, it fully runs on ethane.
Whereas, for a lot of naphtha crackers,
they play around with the LPG share
depending on the price movements.
>> I've learned a lot from this
conversation. I would be lying if I
didn't say that, you know, I'm going to
have to go back and
look at what some of these things are,
whatever.
But, just to help me conceptualize what
some of these things are, I remember
from uh liberation day, the trade fights
in 2025, one of the few things that the
US exports to China in mass, ex- other
than soybeans, is ethane. I don't know.
What is it? Can you just explain that?
Why do we have a lot of extra ethane and
why does China need to get it from a lot
of us and what does it go into?
>> It all depends on what we mean by a lot.
That's a very relative term.
>> I just know that we about half of all US
exports of ethane, which is extracted
from US shale gas, which probably
explains why we have a lot, head to
China. So, what are they what what's the
deal with that?
>> Yeah. So, firstly, that mainly comes
because the US is a very large producer
of shale gas, which yields a lot of
ethane LPG.
And because the US has well, basically
exceeded in its LPG ethane production
what it domestically needs, it has
started to export a lot. And then that's
still ongoing. We still have some new
terminals coming up in 2026 and beyond
it will increase the capacity for LPG
and ethane to be exported. But the
reason why I answered this question
skeptically initially is because if you
look at the total volumes,
you talk about China, if I'm not
mistaken,
in 2025 imported around 5 or 6 million
tons of ethane. And you can make well,
around 5 to 6 million tons of ethylene
from it, which is about 10% of China's
production capacity, right? So, is that
a lot? Kind of is, not really.
>> That's kind of a lot relative to US
industry, but it's not really a lot in
the grand scheme of how much China is
using and producing.
>> And even for the US, this is probably if
we convert this into mill in into
barrels per day, it's probably around
200 to 300,000 barrels per day. Which is
>> Even this article I'm saying says about
half of all US exports of ethane go to
China, which means this is just a
fraction of total ethane production in
the US.
>> Exactly.
>> Okay.
>> So, that's I think the entire ethane
story is relatively, if I can use the
word, overhyped because I think if you
just re-read the articles, it seems like
there's a huge wave of new ethane
crackers in Europe and in Asia, etc. But
if you really double down on which
facilities they are in in Europe, it's
one. It's project one.
>> the ethane hype on on watch. We're going
to tell all these people going around
thinking Yeah, the the ethane hype ends
now. I think Yeah.
>> By the way, by the way, guys, to
actually finish one of my list because
it was mentioned already how there are
two two points on US and ethane and how
much flexibility there is there.
I think another thing is just production
volumes. That goes up, but it goes up
steadily.
To me, it seems very unlikely that
production could surge by that much that
you could really substitute for any
notable amounts. That's the second point
on ethane substituting for naphtha.
There is just the limited supplies for
now that can go up, but also that takes
time.
>> Mhm.
I have an informal gauge of how bad
things are, and it's the sort of
cocktail party question type thing. But,
you know, when you're going out and
speaking to people now as a
petrochemicals analyst, how many people
are starting to actually get very
interested in the future of plastics and
maybe get very worried when they talk to
you?
>> Bold of you to assume I go out and speak
to people.
>> [laughter]
>> We'll stop there. No, pooh. I think the
conversations have changed. I mean, more
on an informal note here, right? Because
I've been in the industry for 4 years,
like I mentioned, oil more broadly 2
years and petrochemicals 2 years.
During the first 2 years, and maybe that
was also more of the zeitgeist back
then, 2022, 2023, a lot of the
conversations were about morality of
working as an oil analyst, very
important work.
Now, a lot of that has dissipated, or
maybe I just don't talk to those people
anymore. I'm not sure. [laughter]
But, I think nowadays people, to my
observation, approach those questions a
lot more practically.
And
a lot of people are Well, about
petrochemicals, I think a lot of people
are more curious about the baseline
understanding of how the industry works
if they're curious at all, right? Cuz, I
mean, quite frankly, for a lot of
>> [laughter]
>> I struggle I I talk to people from time
to time, but very rarely actually about
petrochemicals. Also because it takes
kind of a baseline denominator to get
into it, and I feel that
you need to bombard counterparty with a
lot of baseline information to kind of
get to an interesting point, to which
I'm like they're probably also not that
interested in that.
>> Well, I I have one last question, which
is just tell us about the next several
weeks, and what are you looking out for,
and how bad could it get, and what is
the time frame for that? Give us your
sort of outlook and tell your clients.
They ask, "How bad is it? What's going
on?" And let's suppose we none of us
know when the the war is going to end.
It could We're recording this March
24th, 9:53 a.m. It could end by the time
this episode comes out. But let's just
say we don't know. The war is going on
in a month, suppose. What How What are
we looking at?
>> Still one asterisk there, whether the
war continues or not, which we talk
about in binary terms. It does not mean
that the Strait of Hormuz will become
accessible again. It's just important
caveat.
So that's when I look over the next
weeks or months. Again, I usually
abstain from giving political
commentary, but to me as an analyst,
just looking at baseline assumptions
over the next weeks or months,
the assumption that the Strait of Hormuz
will become passable again to me is very
hard to make. So that's my first really
major takeaway, at least when I look at
my own
forecast outlooks, which partially have
become completely obsolete. We need I
need to overhaul.
But I'm very inclined to make that
assumption. Still waiting for a couple
of days, weeks to see how things
develop, but that's my first really
major thing that I I just find the
argument that the Strait of Hormuz that
things return to normal in terms of
shipping incredibly hard to make. So
point number one. Now, when it comes to
chemicals,
>> [sighs]
>> firstly, spread between naphtha and
crude oil, especially in Asia, I expect
to search, especially to search in early
April. Reason being because Asia still
has to tap into its inventories, naphtha
inventories. They're not a lot, but they
can cover a little bit of ground. We
again still have to see the impact of
the voyages. I think we've just bought
that time. We're now entering the phase
where you really see more material
shortages.
I think all of that will peak in early
April. And then again, technically
depends on what happens next. That's
point number one. Point number two, what
I'm really looking out for is any
announcements on projects that were in
the pipeline from China.
And technically the Middle East, but the
Middle East I've already kind of
provisionally
done away with with well, that's
probably not going to work out in 2026
2027.
Any projects for planned for 2026, what
happens there? Point number three, what
is China's strategy here at large going
forward? Cuz China is in a very
interesting position. It's not as badly
affected as South Korea or Japan.
But it still changes a lot of things.
Because well, for a lot of new
facilities, for example. So China had
about 20 million tons of new ethylene
capacity in a pipeline, almost all of
which coming from cracking, almost all
of which coming from naphtha, a lot of
which hinging on crude oil coming from
the Middle East. What happens to that?
That's a big question mark to me.
And I'm curious to see indeed whether
we're going to see a shift more toward
new coal-based facilities. I think that
would take a couple of months rather
than weeks, but that's something I'm
looking out for.
And in the same vein,
two more points. One being Western
Hemisphere, US. Will we see a research
interest in investments?
And Western Hemisphere, Latin America,
Bolivia, Peru, Venezuela, which had a
lot of interest in their chemical
industries in the past, but it was
dropped again.
Will we see a renewed interest there?
And potentially in Argentina with a lot
of shale gas. And then lastly, Europe.
Europe is very interesting because up
until recently, I've been going on and
on about how Europe's chemical industry
is in decline.
And it was. Now ironically, and this is
a big topic of debate, but I take the
stance that all of this happening
very much more likely than not is a net
benefit for a lot of chemical producers
in Europe. And this is a big topic to
unpack, maybe for another time.
But I would definitely be watching
indeed whether this turns out this way
for European producers.
>> Philip Garts, thank you so much for
coming on All Thoughts. Really enjoyed
the conversation. That was a lot of fun.
>> Thank you, too, guys.
>> [music]
>> Joe, that was a lot of fun. I always
appreciate analysts who come with the
numbers just memorized and just rattle
off like, well, there's difference
between production versus capacity, all
of that.
>> Right. Or or there's like, okay, South
Korea, Malaysia, Japan, Indonesia, all
right, Singapore, that gets you to 44
million that Yeah, the people who can do
that, those are the people that always
know their stuff. And it's a details
matter.
>> But the last question you asked about,
you know, what Philip is looking out for
and his answer, I wrote about this in
the All Thoughts newsletter yesterday,
which is why it's on my mind. But like,
when we're talking about the closure of
the Strait of Hormuz, we're basically
talking about like the choke point of
all choke points in the global economy,
right? And obviously, oil is a big part
of that, but as we just learned in this
episode, so is petrochemicals, so is
fertilizer. We've done previous episodes
on that. And so
it strikes me as almost inevitable that
people are going to come away from this
experience, no matter how long it goes
on for, with the intention to build out
their own capacity or secure their own
supply. And it was interesting even in a
place like Europe, which we tend to
think of sometimes as in structural
decline, certainly in terms of its
chemicals industry,
>> Yeah.
>> even there, like you could see a revival
as a result of this. Even, you know, 3
weeks worth of disruption.
>> Yeah, I I really think this is the main
story. It was the main story before the
start of the Iran war and now clearly an
accelerant to this story, which is just
every [snorts] country wanting to have
greater capacity domestically and to be
less reliant on choke points. And look,
if we knew for a fact that the Strait of
Hormuz was A going to reopen just as it
was a month ago and B never close again,
how would you possibly know that? Then
he's like, "Oh, we don't need to do
anything." But like we're in a state, we
know now that like it is closable. We
know it's closable. Not only do we know
that it's closable,
we know that it's closable without a
particularly large military effort that
you fire a few drones or missiles a day,
not even a particularly costly effort,
and you can bring so many industries and
so many countries and so much activity
basically to a halt. That fact can never
be unknown again, basically. That's sort
of what Taleb talks about when he That
is sort of the significant of a black
swan. That that word gets abused a lot
because every time an event happens the
black swan, but the key insight where I
find it actually to be a useful phrase
is if you think all swans are white and
you see a black swan, then you know for
the rest of your life then you know that
they exist. And so it is a black swan in
the sense that if the Strait of Hormuz
can be closed, which is something that
people have contemplated before with
relatively little effort, you're going
to know that the rest of your life and
that's going to change planning for the
rest of your life and it'll be really
interesting to see. It's also just
interesting I think his point about how
because of Chinese supply so many of
these Korean, Japanese, etc. crackers
were already in trouble and now what's
going to happen there, I mean that is
also a really big structural shortage.
There's sort of a the milkshake of
economic activity pouring into China
relative to everywhere else. So lots of
things going on at once.
>> Well, also the non-substitutability
of polyethylene, especially packaging.
Like the idea that we're not all
suddenly going to switch to burlap bags
and bring our own like wooden crates to
to pick up like beans from the
Yeah, I I could see that being an
aesthetic choice that some people go
with, but not scalable.
>> All right, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman Dash at
Dash Bot and Keil Brooks at Keil Brooks.
And for more Odd Lots content, go to
Bloomberg.com/oddlots
for the daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all
these topics 24/7 in our Discord
discord.gg/oddlots.
>> And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
[music] it when we talk about Nerdles
and other polymers, then please leave us
a positive review on your favorite
podcast platform. [music]
And remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely ad-free. All you
need to do is find the Bloomberg [music]
channel on Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
>> [music]
[music]